[Summit] Wheel Variant Workshop (#11)
wheelnext/wheelnext: docs/summits/2025_03/workshops/wheel_variants.md

## Abstract

In this workshop, we will focus on brainstorming about the best way to deliver the
Python [Wheel Variant proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/), which enables
hardware-specific and platform-dependent package variants to address modern hardware diversity. It proposes a system for building, packaging, publishing and installing the most suitable package variant for a given platform without fragmenting the Python ecosystem. As well this proposal also focuses on how to minimize the maintenance impact towards `pip` maintainers while attempting to enabling the most flexible ecosystem possible.

## Definition

> A **Wheel Variant** is a Python Wheel specialized for a given platform (hardware, software, etc.).

Reviewer: Technically, there is some overlap with platform tags here, so perhaps add something like "beyond what existing tags provide".

## Rapid Summary of the Solution

- **Wheel Variants System:** Enables multiple wheels for the same Python package name & version, distinguished by
hardware-specific attributes using hash-based unique identifier.

- **Provider Plugins:** Dynamically detect platform attributes and recommend suitable wheels. Plugins can interface
with any Python installer so long as they implement the interface. They could be in any language so long the interface
is respected.

- **Backward Compatibility and Security:** Ensures compatibility with existing Python tooling by guaranteeing that Wheel
Variants will be ignored by non Wheel Variant enabled installers.

## Points of Discussion

Many aspects of the proposal need some in-depth thinking and discussions.
We would like to keep the discussion "reasonably non technical and more focused on user experience".

- **[UX: Package Installation Workflow]:**
    - Shall there be a flag to "enable" variants: `pip install --allow_variants <package>`
    - How do you request a specific `variant` to be installed: `I would like an ARMv8.1a package please`
    - How do you build `lockfiles`. Shall it contain any `variant` information ?
<br><br>

> - **[UX: Packaging Building Workflow]:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[UX: Package Building Workflow]:**
```

>     - What would be a "good approach" for a `Provider Plugin` to "inform the build backend" what Variant Metadata to inject.

Reviewer: Not sure if this covers all of it. For some cases, "plugins" will see more than one possible variant, and we will need some way to tell it which was actually used — say, we could be building a non-CUDA variant in an environment with CUDA installed.

Reviewer 2: Or even the opposite of this as well. PyTorch as an example builds CUDA binaries on nodes where GPUs aren't attached for cost savings.

Author: I tried to keep it short but yes. The provider plugin does **not** have to analyze the platform for the build time.
But the provider plugin is the "reference party" when it comes to "what METADATA are valid".

Imagine "I want to build a CUDA12 - SM90 GPU with AVXZ512 enabled package", which "Variant Metadata" shall be included in the package ? Well the plugin should probably offer a `source-of-truth` API for that. How is the question

## Abstract

> In this workshop, we will focus on brainstorming about the best way to deliver the
> This workshop will focus on the Python [Wheel Variant proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/), which enables
> hardware-specific and platform-dependent package variants to address modern hardware diversity. It proposes a system for
> building, packaging, publishing and installing the most suitable package variant for a given platform without
> fragmenting the Python ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this workshop, we will focus on brainstorming about the best way to deliver the
Python [Wheel Variant proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/), which enables
hardware-specific and platform-dependent package variants to address modern hardware diversity. It proposes a system for building, packaging, publishing and installing the most suitable package variant for a given platform without fragmenting the Python ecosystem. As well this proposal also focuses on how to minimize the maintenance impact towards `pip` maintainers while attempting to enabling the most flexible ecosystem possible.
```

## Definition

A **Wheel Variant** is a Python Wheel specialized for a given platform (hardware, software, etc.).

## Rapid Summary of the Solution

- **Wheel Variants System:** Enables multiple wheels for the same Python package name & version, distinguished by
hardware-specific attributes using hash-based unique identifier.

- **Provider Plugins:** Dynamically detect platform attributes and recommend suitable wheels. Plugins can interface
with any Python installer so long as they implement the interface. They could be in any language so long the interface
is respected.

> - **Backward Compatibility and Security:** Ensures compatibility with existing Python tooling by guaranteing that Wheel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Backward Compatibility and Security:** Ensures compatibility with existing Python tooling by guaranteeing that Wheel
```

Variants will be ignored by non Wheel Variant enabled installers.

## Points of Discussion

Many aspects of the proposal need some in-depth thinking and discussions.
We would like to keep the discussion "reasonably non technical and more focused on user experience".

- **[UX: Package Installation Workflow]:**
    - Shall there be a flag to "enable" variants: `pip install --allow_variants <package>`
    - How do you request a specific `variant` to be installed: `I would like an ARMv8.1a package please`
    - How do you build `lockfiles`. Shall it contain any `variant` information ?
<br><br>
- **[UX: Packaging Building Workflow]:**
    - What would be a "good approach" for a `Provider Plugin` to "inform the build backend" what Variant Metadata to inject.

>     - Arbitry metadata will lead to some chaos. How do we keep a sense of "structure" without

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Arbitrary metadata will lead to some chaos. How do we keep a sense of "structure" without
```

    a centralized entity (shall it be decentralized)?

>     - How do we help package maintainer to select "reasonable sets of variants" to build instead of projects doing
>     something widly different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - How do we help package maintainers select "reasonable sets of variants" to build instead of projects doing
    something wildly different.
```

    - How shall we provide a "build matrix experience" for a given project (build my project for these X many variants).

## Expected Deliverables

By the end of the workshop, we aim to converge to some ideas, strategies and consensus to tackle the aforementioned questions.

## Useful Links

- [Wheel Variant Proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/)
- [Discussion on discuss.python.org](https://discuss.python.org/t/implementation-variants-rehashing-and-refocusing/54884)
- [Tutorial and Working Demo of Wheel Variants](https://github.com/wheelnext/pep_xxx_wheel_variants)
- [PyPackaging Native ~ Packaging projects with GPU code](https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/gpus/)
- [PyPackaging Native ~ Distributing a package containing SIMD code](https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/simd_support/ )

## Workshop Organizers

- **Jonathan Dekhtiar:** NVIDIA - jdekhtiar @ nvidia.com
- **Ralf Gommers:** Quansight - [Email - if you want to share]

> - **Eli Uriegas:** Meta - [Email - if you want to share]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Eli Uriegas:** Meta - eliuriegas @ meta.com
```

## Abstract

In this workshop, we will focus on brainstorming about the best way to deliver the
Python [Wheel Variant proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/), which enables
hardware-specific and platform-dependent package variants to address modern hardware diversity. It proposes a system for
building, packaging, publishing and installing the most suitable package variant for a given platform without

> fragmenting the Python ecosystem. As well this proposal also focuses on how to minimize the maintenance impact towards
> `pip` maintainers while attempting to enabling the most flexible ecosystem possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
fragmenting the Python ecosystem. It also focuses on how to minimize the maintenance impact for
build frontend (`pip`, `uv`, installer`) maintainers while attempting to enabling the most flexible ecosystem possible.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not actually sure this is going to be true - it's a good goal to articulate though:) Complexity will be higher for build backends probably, but there's going to be a decent amount of frontend complexity too. (no change needed to the text)

Author: We should **definitely** aim to limit that complexity - at the very least design with complexity in mind and make a genuine effort to limit the impact.

It doesn't state "there should be no maintenance impact" but rather "how to limit ...".

## Definition

A **Wheel Variant** is a Python Wheel specialized for a given platform at a finer level than what existing tags provide
(hardware, software, etc.).

## Rapid Summary of the Solution

- **Wheel Variants System:** Enables multiple wheels for the same Python package name & version, distinguished by
hardware-specific attributes using hash-based unique identifier.

- **Provider Plugins:** Dynamically detect platform attributes and recommend suitable wheels. Plugins can interface

> with any Python installer so long as they implement the interface. They could be in any language so long the interface

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with any Python installer as long as they implement the interface. They could be in any language as long the interface
```

is respected.

- **Backward Compatibility and Security:** Ensures compatibility with existing Python tooling by guaranteeing that Wheel
Variants will be ignored by non Wheel Variant enabled installers.

## Points of Discussion

Many aspects of the proposal need some in-depth thinking and discussions.
We would like to keep the discussion "reasonably non technical and more focused on user experience".

- **[UX: Package Installation Workflow]:**
    - Shall there be a flag to "enable" variants: `pip install --allow_variants <package>`
    - How do you request a specific `variant` to be installed: `I would like an ARMv8.1a package please`

>     - How do you build `lockfiles`. Shall it contain any `variant` information ?

Reviewer 4: Personally, I think it's a worthy goal (though if there's disagreement, we can always discuss at the summit) that it's possible for users to get the "expected" variant automatically upon running `uv sync` or `pip install`, without having to encode anything about the set of available variants or having to know anything about the concept of variant providers.

By "expected", I mean the variant that the _user_ would expect intuitively: if I have CUDA 12.4 installed, I should get the CUDA 12.4 PyTorch build; if I have no accelerators installed, I should get the CPU PyTorch, etc.

I expect that people will point out problems with this and the assumptions I'm making, but can we aspire to hide this complexity? There are a variety of possible designs that could lead to pushing _even more_ complexity onto the user than exists today. As an extreme example: imagine if the _only_ way to install a variant is for the user to download a distribution from PyPI, unzip it, find the list of variants, figure out the values they want, figure out the hash that corresponds to that value, etc.

Reviewer 3: > Personally, I think it's a worthy goal (though if there's disagreement, we can always discuss at the summit) that it's possible for users to get the "expected" variant automatically

Both "get a matching version" and "get the base/cpu version" have reasonably common use cases. I think I agree that the "get a matching version" is the nicer default - this is also what conda does, and it generally works well. It'll be important to make the UX for switching the default as easy as possible though, because it's also common to want the CPU version (10x smaller download) for development purposes in particular, even when CUDA (or ROCm, or ...) is installed.

Author: Oh I agree. But we need to be super clear among ourselves. No confusion all in alignment. Or there's no hope to convince anyone it's a good idea 👌

And realistically the number of people who will build and distribute variants around the world is gonna be small.

------

One artifact of variants is that without staged releases that @warsawnv was proposing... Well there will be some seconds / minutes / dozen of minutes where the release is in "dirty state" as all the variants and wheels gets uploaded and propagated through the CDN. 

And when you consider a package like PyTorch... Well it's pulled continuously multiple times per seconds probably

Reviewer 3: Ah ... that is a bit different indeed, the "upload sdist last" rule doesn't cut it here. Best to get staged releases first probably.

    a centralized entity (shall it be decentralized)?
    - How do we help package maintainers select a "reasonable set of variants" to build instead of every projects doing
    something wildly different.
    - How shall we provide a "build matrix experience" for a given project (build my project for these X many variants).

## Expected Deliverables

By the end of the workshop, we aim to converge to some ideas, strategies and consensus to tackle the aforementioned questions.

## Useful Links

- [Wheel Variant Proposal](/proposals/pepxxx_wheel_variant_support/)
- [Discussion on discuss.python.org](https://discuss.python.org/t/implementation-variants-rehashing-and-refocusing/54884)
- [Tutorial and Working Demo of Wheel Variants](https://github.com/wheelnext/pep_xxx_wheel_variants)
- [PyPackaging Native ~ Packaging projects with GPU code](https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/gpus/)
- [PyPackaging Native ~ Distributing a package containing SIMD code](https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/simd_support/ )

## Workshop Organizers

- **Jonathan Dekhtiar:** NVIDIA - jdekhtiar @ nvidia.com

> - **Ralf Gommers:** Quansight - [Email - if you want to share]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Ralf Gommers:** Quansight - rgommers @ quansight.com
```
